Right now the world economy stands at an alarming precipice, but would it surprise you to learn that the events of today are nothing new
Give me the next few minutes and I'll show you that there are
Cycles to history that can not only allow you to see the future but to make preparations for the very predictable outcomes
You're about to discover that huge financial
gyrations inflation loss of personal freedom and
Out-of-control government are all things that we have been warned about for centuries and are the direct
Consequences of the monetary system itself. In fact most world history is determined by monetary history
So what lessons can we take from the past to help us navigate the perfect economic storm that awaits us
Debasing a nation's currency supply to pay for public works and war is a pattern that just repeats and repeats
Throughout history and it's a pattern that always ends badly in this double episode
We are going to create a timeline to show the similarities between ancient Rome and the United States today
Just like the USA Rome started out as a republic after
Overthrowing a monarchy. So let's begin with their early economy in around 500 BC
In the early days of the Roman Republic for the first
178 years there's no evidence of big inflation
They were using gold and silver coinage mostly as their currency small denominations were made out of copper and bronze
Then Hannibal of Carthage
Starts to harass Rome in something called the second Punic War and to pay for this war
they did deficit spending by taking the coins that they took in in taxes melting them down and
Adding cheap and abundant base metals such as copper so that they could mint more coins. This caused a big inflation and
The inflation was one of the factors that brought the Roman Republic down to a dictatorship the Roman Empire
Most of Rome's gold and silver was stored in vaults under the floor of their Treasury
Which was also known as the temple of Saturn if you visit Rome go to the forum in the center of the city
where you can still find the ruins of the temple today and
Here's something I found really interesting
The US Treasury in Washington DC has almost exactly the same design
So now let's start filling in our timeline of events to keep track of the major similarities between Rome and the USA
We just learned that the early Roman Republic enjoyed a long period of practically no inflation
Because they used sound money pure gold and silver
Interestingly the United States started on the same path from the late 1700s to the early
1900s prices were very stable
Thanks to laws that mandated the use of gold and silver as money and our people were not robbed by inflation
But in both instances it was the ongoing debasement of the money for war spending and Public Works that led to economic chaos
Tell us the parallels between Rome and
What's happening in the United States today?
Well, they obviously two very different societies, but there are some broad parallels Rome was a republic
They made sure they had two people each year. Who were the the rulers the consuls?
They always changed because the Romans were worried. They'd had a monarchy before very unpopular
They overthrew it so they didn't want anyone getting too much - too many powers
What did in Rome no surprise?
excessive taxation and
debasing the money
when you look at the coinage it started out being an exact measure of copper for the Cistercian and silver for the denarii and
By the time it was all over worth. Absolutely
Nothing with perhaps a wash of silver to make it look like the original thing, which is exactly what we're doing now
So this patterns repeat themselves?
They always repeat themselves
The Romans were the first culture to understand that a currency maintains its value because of its rarity
Julius Paulus once said this device being officially promulgated
Circulates and maintains its purchasing power not so much from its substance as from its quantity
Even still the Romans never stopped churning out more currency just like the USA Today and the ancient Greeks before them
But in their race to debase the Romans came up with some new twists of their own
The first of these twists was coin clipping
Whenever a Roman would enter a government building, they'd simply clipped the edge off of their gold or silver coin
they would save up all of those clippings melt them down and mint more coins expanding the currency supply and
when that wasn't enough they developed the art of
revaluation where you just take a coin and you stamp a new value on it you got
1/100
That simple
The move away from
precious metals to
Something less than precious metals and the Roman Empire famously clipped their coins
This was a debasement of the currency. There wasn't a paper currency, but it was a debasement of the currency in the US
There's a very interesting phenomenon going on where they're not clipping coins
But when you go to the supermarket you find that the portions of the items at the supermarket on sale are shrinking, you know
The servings on various other consumer products are getting smaller and smaller, but this price is the same
So it's very similar to that old Roman coin clipping trick from 2,000 years ago
It's it's another form of currency debasement, but it's hidden through cardboard and marketing and fancy presentation
But the people are nevertheless having their currency to baste
So why should you care about this the quality of a society is directly proportional to the quality of its money
Stable money leads to stable prices which leads to a stable society
whereas debasement of the currency leads to the demise of empires
The major reason for Rome's ongoing currency debasement was to pay for their ever-expanding empire and never-ending Wars
The precious metals content of their coinage fell further and further until it had next to no
Connection with the pure gold and silver that had initially provided them with a stable economy
Cut to today and we see the same pattern
up until the outbreak of World War one the United States had very high levels of precious metals in its coinage and
Treasury notes were backed by gold at a one-to-one ratio
From there the USA debased its currency more and more
to pay for World War 2 the Korean War and then the Vietnam War until
Finally the link between gold and the US dollar was severed completely
For those new to the series, let's revisit
The pivotal event that has managed to sneak under the radar of modern historians as nothing more than a side note
Even though it will have repercussions for generations to come. It was an unprecedented act of global debasement by a
Wanna be Emperor that would make any Roman ruler. Hang his head in shame
Most people think that President Nixon's criminal activities were limited to
Wiretapping and spying on the competition, but his greatest crime came on, August 15th
1971 when he severed the last ties between the dollar and gold when he ended the Bretton Woods system. I
Have directed secretary Connally to suspend temporarily the convertibility of the dollar into gold or other reserve assets
Except in amounts and conditions determined to be in the interest of monetary stability and in the best interest of the United States
The Bretton Woods system tied all of the world's currencies to gold through the US dollar but instead of running out and hanging the guy
when he took as the world off of gold the world just yawned and
Accepted that we were now on a fiat currency system that we were now on this infinitely
Expanding system that we no longer had money we had currency
Money should be a fixed measure of value. It's like
5,280 feet in a mile or
12 inches in a foot I gave the example
Imagine trying to build a house a twenty five hundred square feet if the foot changed each day
It was 12 inches one day 10 the next 20 the next very hard to do if that's changing
Well the center or the clock
The the 60 minutes in an hour imagine if they floated the clock
So it's 60 minutes an hour one day 30 the next 90
The next you shouldn't have to have had just rivers futures to figure out how many hours you're working. You're baking a cake
I love this example
And it says that bake the batter for 45 minutes then you have to figure out is that inflation adjusted minutes?
Is it a California minute a Nevada minute just makes life infinitely complicated
So when you have a fixed measure
When you go to the market you assume if you're getting 16 ounces of liquid, it's 16 not 13, not 18
Just makes a con which is the source of wealth people doing things with each other
infinitely easier
It is very odd
That we've established a situation where what people do is scramble to borrow liabilities
certainly
I guess the most attractive
Liability in the world or put a different way the most attractive free-trading lie on the planet is the US dollar
We joke an investment conferences
It's the worst currency in the world, except all the others if you're gonna trade it in a lie, it better be a liquid lie
What the United States dollar has going for it is the most liquid lie in the world
I mean if you think about the advantage that we have now, yes, it's
It's a horrible thing to do morally but what we do is amazing. It's amazing that we can get away with this
we print a lie a
dream on a piece of paper and we ship it to Brazil and they send us coffee and we ship the same lie to
Germany and they send us a Mercedes and we ship the same Y to Japan and they shipped us a stereo
It's actually a pretty cool deal
I mean, I feel bad about it in the sense, but it's it's grandly amusing and a sort of a cosmic sense
You just need to understand that somehow some time some way. There's going to be a reckoning
The dollars involved a worldwide as a major currency, so it's one half of everything we do and
It has no definition. I used to get a charge out of asking Bernanke and Greenspan had define a dollar and you know
They can't define a dollar they you know in the old days
It was a weight the weight of silver a weight of gold and and that's what it was supposed to be according to the Constitution
Well, dr. McCracken not being an economist, can you explain to me briefly how in the world do you determine?
What a value of a dollar is in relation to a French franc for instance
If you can't convert that dollar into gold what standard do you have? What is it worth at all?
You determine that's going to be determined in the marketplace just as really largely it has already
So what is this going to do then to for instance the speculator in gold. How is this going to affect him?
Is that price going to drop arise the?
The official price of gold of course has not been changed
That was not that was not a part of this program at all nor is that contemplated?
Well, maybe they should have contemplated what was likely to happen because for anyone who had studied history the outcome was perfectly clear
Rather than help the economy
Nixon's actions made things a lot worse and the public started feeling the effects of inflation much more acutely
It was hard for savers to keep their heads above water unless they had saved in the ultimate stores of value
gold and silver
Just as it had always done throughout history
Gold once again accounted for the expanding fiat currency supply by rising in price to cover that supply
Gold had done this as recently as
1934 when the USA's debasement really started heating up and gold was revalued from 20 dollars and 67 cents an ounce to
$35 an ounce
Now the process began again as the public bid the price up from $35 an ounce in
1971 climbing all the way to
850 dollars an ounce in 1980
Easily accounting for the massive quantities of currency the USA had conjured out of thin air now that Nixon had removed all restrictions
Gold had once again held an out of control currency to answer
Getting back to the Julius Paulus quote about the value of a currency being decided by the quantity rather than the content
one of the biggest economic
Hurdles that mankind repeatedly trips on is that we have never been able to control the quantity of currency
And this is one of the reasons why gold has always been the ultimate money. It can't be printed and it keeps us in check
Today, I think cryptocurrencies are a very exciting development and have tremendous
possibilities the bottom line is that governments have a long history of trying to cheat gold either through the basement or
manipulation of the markets but here's the thing in the end gold always wins and
That brings us back to the Romans who went through many cycles of currency debasement for war spending
Then inflation being felt by the public then revaluation of the currency then more debasement for deficit spending on war
resulting in even more inflation being felt by the public the cycle repeated again and again
Those who were able to hold gold outside the official system maintained their purchasing power those who did not
Suffered greatly in two 70 AD Emperor aurelion took power and had the now worthless official coinage recalled and minted again
To contain a small amount of silver just 5% this Act brought a new vitality to Rome
But unfortunately, it was short-lived as government after government gave in to the temptation of spending beyond their means
Eventually wars were funded by levying huge taxes on businesses and the rich
This only had the effect of closing down many essential businesses. The more meddling the government did with the economy the worse things became
The government started confiscating private property by force to fill their empty state coffers
Rome was sliding into ruin and
That brings us to Emperor Diocletian
His actions are the first recorded example of the following hidden secret of money wage and price controls do not work
He came to power as inflation was surging but his decisive actions only added fuel to the fire
So because the economy was getting worse and worse
Diocletian created a whole bunch of great government solutions. He created a bunch of works projects
he hired he hired a bunch of the homeless and
People that were unemployed made them soldiers and government employees and this caused
deficit spending to just go out of control an
inflation raged into what is known as the first documented hyperinflation
So to get inflation under control in 301 ad
Diocletian issued his infamous edict of prices
this was a massive volume of a
List of all of the wages and the prices people could charge for goods and services
And it was all enforced under the penalty of death
So what happened was instead of risking your life to sell something at a profit so that you could stay in business
People just closed up shop
Instead of doing a job that was listed in the book. That was below a living wage
People quit their chosen career and tried to pursue a job that wasn't listed in the book
The result of this was the Diocletian came out with a law that said every son had to go into his father's business
under the penalty of death
When governments start meddling with an economy. The result is always the same
Prices become distorted. This is a huge danger because prices act as a signal for an economy
They indicate to producers and buyers where true value lies
The outcome is always
economic turmoil shortages and black markets
We've seen what happened to gold when Nixon started his economic interference
so now let's go back and see what happened when Diocletian started his
Jumbo-sized meddling with the economy
We know when Diocletian created the Edict of crisis that the price of gold was fifty thousand
Denarii per pound and then we also know
From transaction receipts around fifty years later. The price of gold has risen to 1 billion two hundred million denarii pound
That's a forty-two thousand four hundred percent
Hyperinflation over a 50-year period that would be similar to if gold was $35 an ounce
50 years ago today
One ounce of gold would be about a million and a half dollars. Another analogy that I can make is
If an average family car was about two thousand dollars fifty years ago
Today it would be selling for eighty five million dollars
Just imagine 85 million on the windshield of a car at a car lot
That's the type of inflation these poor people suffered through
Well weigh wage and price controls
Appends an economy gives more power to the government
What are price controls?
Prices are supposed to convey information. That's what markets are about knowledge and information
So a price will tell you something is dear Oh get out and produce more
The price is low. It may be a producer of producing too many of it. So it's a way of conveyance of information
so you devote your efforts to something that people want not what a bureaucrat dictates so when governments trashed the money and
Your prices nominal prices are going up
The government responses. Oh, they're greedy speculators or merchants or whatever and so USA
You can't charge as much or what?
That means is you get a black market and you hurt the production of the thing the idea that government can substitute
For people interacting among themselves is preposterous
This pattern of failed price controls is something we see throughout history and across the globe
Skip forward over 1,500 years and governments still hadn't learned their lesson during the chaos of the French Revolution the government
Issued a set of wage and price controls known as the law of maximum also imposed under the penalty of death
It's worth noting that when wage and price controls are implemented
Government always tries to deflect attention away from the problems that it has created
Itself by shifting the focus to businesses who are labeled as greedy hoarders or priced gougers
In reality most are just average people trying to keep their business afloat
Doing their best to deal with the unstable supply and demand curve
Created by government meddling and France was no exception to this blame game
During the law of maximum many innocent people were executed food shortages developed and black markets ruled until finally
fifteen months later
The Act was repealed because it didn't work and all the stored up energy of government manipulation was unleashed at once
Leading to a further period of chaos and inflation for France
I agree with steve forbes the idea of wage and price controls is absolutely preposterous
Now we'll skip forward another 200 years and government was added again
Many people don't realize that Nixon's speech from 1971 also included the announcement of a 90 day wage and price freeze
The United States was suffering from big inflation. Thanks to deficit spending for the Vietnam War silver had been taken out of circulation in
1965 reducing our coinage to worthless flex of base metal and the paper currency supply had been expanded greatly
Did that sound familiar?
Just like Diocletian Nixon's team of economic boffins thought they could curb inflation by fixing wages and prices
The time has come for decisive action action that will break the vicious circle of spiraling prices and costs. I
am today ordering a freeze on all
Prices and wages throughout the United States for a period of 90 days
Working together we will break the back of inflation
You'd think that these people would learn from history, but they don't
To get an idea of how out of touch the men with their hands on the economic levers were
Listen to what Nixon's adviser had to say about the duration of the controls
would it be your
anticipation that it would take more than 90 days to break the back of inflation as the president put it tonight that
There would have to be a further extension of an actual wage price freeze. I
Would not know I wouldn't I don't think one can say that
It will necessarily take longer
where we're sailing to some extent and an uncharted see here, but this
This I think is is a reasonable estimate of the time that's going to be required
Dan Rather
President Nixon is expected to speak for about 15 minutes on his new economic policies
The president's address tonight comes against a background of the following facts among others
record high gold prices and rapidly increasing cost of living figures for most Americans the wholesale price index rose by
2.1 percent during the month of May
The index of industrial commodities in the last three months has risen at an annual rate of fifteen point nine percent
The worst since the Korean War twenty years ago
All of that part of the general background of the president's remarks tonight
Every American family is confronted with a real and pressing problem of higher prices
And I have decided that the time has come to take strong and effective action to deal with that problem
Effective immediately therefore I am ordering a freeze on prices
This freeze will hold prices at levels. No higher than those charged during the first eight days of June
It will cover all prices paid by consumers
What was our effort how were dad signs saying?
What kind of an idiot would do the same thing over and over expecting it expect different results each time?
And it's the same pattern. It's happened to prepend li cycle after cycle after cycle after cycle for thousands of years
country borrows itself into bankruptcy
It creates more money to try to pay its debt prices go up people rebel the whole system falls apart
And I'm scared about it
Country's collapse over this they go to war about this kind of thing rebellion in the street
Overthrows a government the whole nine yards there is nothing to be gained from inflation and everything to lose and we're going to lose everything
Around the world people don't seem to realize that government intervention always makes things worse
It's the government manipulating things whenever you manipulate something and try and control it over here
And and not allow the free markets to balance everything all by themselves
Something comes squirting out way over here that you just don't expect
for instance the dot-com bubble popped in
2000 Alan Greenspan lowered interest rates to try and get the stock markets back up again, and he accidentally created a real estate bubble
That's now devastating the world
Beck during World War 1 they inflated the currency supply tremendously
The Federal Reserve was born just at the beginning of World War one
we added to the currency supply by adding bonds to our
back our currency along with gold then there was this big
It's called the Depression of 1921. It's the single greatest
Deflation that the US has ever seen it's bigger than the Great Depression the contraction of the currency
Supply was huge. The reason nobody knows about the depression of 1921
they're they only know of the stock market crash of 29 and the Great Depression is
Because the government did not rush in to save us the Federal Reserve didn't try to suddenly lower interest rates down to zero
They didn't manipulate the free markets. They let the free markets work. It was horrible for a year. There were bankruptcies and foreclosures
People lost homes and things like that
but the bankruptcies and the businesses that that
folded there were new businesses that were more efficient that grew up to take their place and
when a home gets foreclosed on it gets resold to somebody else and
yes, it was horrible, but the people that were
leveraged out are the people that weren't in full control of their finances or the
Inefficient businesses that were just hanging on by a thread anyway, yeah, they went under
but because the government didn't rush in to save us and the Federal Reserve didn't try and manipulate the economy the free markets healed at
All and in 18 months was a memory
In fact, 10 years later. Nobody could even remember the memory it was gone
Mark Twain is often quoted as saying history doesn't repeat
But it sure does rhyme and as you've seen from this episode that sure rings true
the wage and price controls we will probably end up trying this in the United States sometime in the future and you know
They tried it during Diocletian. It didn't work. It destroys the economy and eventually they have to repeal the Act
They tried it during the French Revolution. It didn't work
It ruins the economy and they have to repeal it Nixon tried it it didn't work
It ruined the economy and they had to repeal it. It's not gonna work the next time they try it
This stuff just keeps on happening
Over and over and over again and part of it is caused by the four-year election cycle
all of the
Politicians are worried about what's going to happen on their watch and they push all the problems forward to them to the next administration
They really don't care what's going to happen out in the future. They care what's happening. You know how they're remembered
So I'm expecting this to happen in the United States sometime right now
I'm expecting a deflation, but when we get to big inflation or hyperinflation
You can pretty much count on the fact that they're going to make the same stupid mistakes
Because politicians do not read monetary history
This is just the beginning of the similarities between ancient Rome and the USA in the next episode
we're going to focus on some more amazing events that are echoing throughout history to today and
We'll see what the future holds for the United States if we continue down the same path so many societies have gone before
You